Most of the regions surrounding the city are administered by the Ujjain Municipal Corporation (UMC). The city is administered by a Divisional Commissioner and a Collectorate Office as well as the Mayor. They are responsible for the town and Country Planning Department, Forest Department, Public Health Engineering, Public Works Department and MP Electricity Board.[53][54]

Ujjain has been a metropolitan municipality with a mayor-council form of government. The Ujjain Municipal Corporation (UMC) was established in 1956 under the Madhya Pradesh Nagar Palika Nigam Adhiniyam. The UMC was established in 1886 as Nagar Palika, but the Municipal Corporation of Ujjain was declared on a par with the Gwalior Municipal Corporation. The UMC is responsible for public education, correctional institutions, libraries, public safety, recreational facilities, sanitation, water supply, local planning and welfare services. The mayor and councillors are elected to five-year terms.[55][56]

The Ujjain Development Authority, also known as UDA, is the urban planning agency serving Ujjain. Its headquarters are located in the Bharatpuri area of Ujjain. It was established under the Madhya Pradesh Town and Country Planning Act, 1973.[57]

Ujjain Lok Sabha constituency is one of the 29 Lok Sabha constituencies in Madhya Pradesh state in central India. This constituency came into existence in 1951 as one of the 9 Lok Sabha constituencies in the erstwhile Madhya Bharat state. It is reserved for the candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes since 1966. This constituency covers the entire Ujjain district and part of Ratlam district. Previously, Dr. Chintamani Malviya of the Bharatiya Janata Party was the member of parliament who won in the 2014 Indian general elections.[58]

The Current Member of Parliament from Ujjain is Anil Firojiya (BJP) after the Lok Sabha Election of 2019.[59]

Tourism
Mahakaleshwar Jyotirlinga
Kal Bhairav Temple
Sandipani Ashram
Mangalnath Temple
Education
University
Maharshi Panini Sanskrit University
Vikram University
Avantika University
Medical Colleges
Ruxmaniben Deepchand Gardi Medical College
Govt. Medical College Amaltas Medical College

Engineering Colleges
Ujjain Engineering College (Govt.)
School of Engineering Vikram University (Govt.)
MIT Group of Institutes, Ujjain
Shree Guru Sandipani Institute of Science and Technology
Prashanti Institute of Technology
Alpine Institute of Technology
Schools
St. Paul's convent H.S. School
Christu Jyoti Convent School
Ujjain Public School
Lokmanya Tilak higher Secondary School, Ujjain
St. Mary's Convent School
Nirmala Convent School
Takshshila Junior College
Kalidas Montessori Sr. Sec. School
Carmel Convent Sr. Sec. School[60]
Industry
Major industrial areas surrounding Ujjain are 'Dewas Road Industrial Area', 'Maxi Road Industrial Area' Vikram Udhogpuri, and 'Tajpur Industrial Area'.[61]

Indore and Dewas are the cities where majority of the industries are present. Both Indore and Dewas are in close proximity to Ujjain, providing employment to people in Ujjain and nearby areas.

The Government of Madhya Pradesh has allotted 1,200 acres for the development of an industrial area on the Dewas-Ujjain Road (MP State Highway 18) near Narwar village. Originally named "Vikramaditya Knowledge City", the area was envisaged as an educational hub. Due to diminished investment prospects, it was renamed to "Vikram Udyog Nagari" ("Vikram Industrial City"). As of 2014, the government has conceptualized it as a half-industrial, half-educational area. The stakeholders in the project include the state government and the Delhi Mumbai Industrial Corridor (DMIC) Trust.[62]

Transportation
Airport
Ujjain does not have any airport but has an airstrip on Dewas road which is used for air transport purposes. In 2013, the Government of Madhya Pradesh started a Ujjain-Bhopal air services as a joint venture with Ventura AirConnect. Due to very low booking, the ambitious project was scrapped. The main reason for the failure of the plan was due to improper timing of flights. The nearest airport is the Devi Ahilyabai Holkar International Airport at Indore (57 km).

Railway

Ujjain Junction
Ujjain Junction is the main railway station of Ujjain, and it is directly or indirectly well-connected to all the major railway stations in India.[63] It lies on the Indore–Dewas, Ratlam–Bhopal, Indore–Nagda and Guna–Khandwa route. To the west it is connected to Ratlam Junction, to the north it is connected with Nagda Junction, to the east it is connected with Maksi Junction, Bhopal Junction, and to the south it is connected to Indore Junction BG, Dewas Junction Harda BG.[64][65]

C&W Training Centre/Ujjain/WR

There are six railway stations in the Ujjain city and its suburbs:

Station name	Station code	Railway zone	Total platforms
Ujjain Junction	UJN	Western Railway	08
Chintaman Ganesh	CNN	Western Railway	03
Matana Buzurg	MABG	Western Railway	02
Pingleshwar	PLW	Western Railway	02
Vikramnagar	VRG	Western Railway	03
Tajpur	TJP	Western Railway	02
Road

Ujjain-Indore Highway
Dewas Gate Stand and Nana Kheda Bus Stand are the two bus stands in the city that provide service to destinations located in the states. A large number of state run private buses are available for Ahmedabad, Jaipur, Ajmer, Khajuraho, Harda, Indore, Bhopal, Pune, Mumbai, Kota, Mandu, Jhalawar and various other locations. The city has a well connected road network including Indore Road, Badnagar Road, Dewas Road, Agar Road, Nagda Road and Maksi Road. There are three national highways; 47 connects to Ahmedabad, proposed 148NG connects to Garoth and 552G connects to Indore.[66][67][68][69]

Other regional highways passing through the city are:

Indore – Ujjain Road via SH 27 part of NH 552G
Kota / Agar – Ujjain Road via NH 552G
Bhopal / Dewas – Ujjain Road via SH 18 now NH 148NG
Ratlam / Barnagar – Ujjain Road via SH 18 now NH
Jaora / Nimach – Ujjain Road via SH 17
Maksi – Ujjain Road (Connects to NH 3)
Harda - Ujjain Road (Connects to Via National Highway 59A NH 47) and SH 18
Ujjain - Garoth Proposed New Green Field Four Lane National Highway No NH 148NG
Local transport
Ujjain depends on an extensive network of auto rickshaws, city busses, private taxis and Tata Magic, that operate throughout the city, connecting one part with another. UMC has recently introduced city buses with a public private partnership project as the city was identified urban agglomerations with less than 1 million population under the Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission.[70][71]

Sports
Cricket is one of the most popular sports in the city. Ujjain is also home to the Ujjain Divisional Cricket Association which is affiliated to BCCI. The city does not have any big stadium, but hosted Ranji Trophy matches at Pipe Factory Ground in 1977 and 1980.[72]

Kite flying is another popular activity in the city around Makar Sakranti.[73]

Smart city
Further information: Smart city
Ujjain city was shortlisted under the Government of India's flagship programme Smart Cities Mission. Under the mission, UMC (UMC, Ujjain Ujjain Municipal Corporation) shall participate in the smart cities challenge by Ministry of Urban Development. As part of this, UMC is preparing a Smart City Proposal (SCP). SCP will include smart city solutions based on the consultations to be held with the key stakeholders of the city. UMC invited the suggestions from citizens of Ujjain to make ‘Ujjain as a smart city’. The citizens were able to post their views pertaining to basic services such as water supply, sewerage, urban transport, social infrastructure and e-governance.[74]

Notable people
Notable people who were born or lived in Ujjian include:

Sage Sandipani
Varāhamihira
Bhāskara II
Chashtana
Kālidāsa
Devi (wife of Ashoka)
Shivmangal Singh Suman
Shreeram Shankar Abhyankar
Bharthari
Yashoda Devi
Vivian Dsena
Thawar Chand Gehlot
Gundecha Brothers
Satyanarayan Jatiya
Hukam Chand Kachwai
Sachida Nagdev
Naman Ojha
Paramartha
Sartaj Singh
Saumya Tandon
Vikramaditya
Viraj Mahajan[75]
Juhi Parmar
Goverdhan Lal Oza
Sharma Bandhu
V. S. Wakankar
Sharad Joshi
Mohan Yadav
